README.md, before:

# CakePHP Search

[![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/travis/FriendsOfCake/search/master.svg?style=flat-square)](https://travis-ci.org/FriendsOfCake/search)
[![Coverage Status](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/FriendsOfCake/search.svg?style=flat-square)](https://codecov.io/github/FriendsOfCake/search)
[![Total Downloads](https://img.shields.io/packagist/dt/friendsofcake/search.svg?style=flat-square)](https://packagist.org/packages/friendsofcake/search)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](https://packagist.org/packages/friendsofcake/search)

Search provides a simple interface to create paginate-able filters for your CakePHP 3.x application.

## Requirements

* CakePHP 3.0.0 or greater.

## Installation

* Install the plugin with composer from your CakePHP Project's ROOT directory
(where composer.json file is located)

```sh
php composer.phar require friendsofcake/search
```

* Load the plugin by running command

```sh
./bin/cake plugin load Search
```

or adding following to your `config/bootstrap.php`

```php
Plugin::load('Search');
```

## Usage

The plugin has three main parts which you will need to configure and include in
your application.

### Table class

There are three tasks during setup in your table class. Firstly you must add a
`use` statement for the `Search\Manager`. Next you need to attach the `Search`
behaviour to your table class. Then you have two options to work with the search
filters:

The first way is the prefered way as it works the same as many core classes as
well. In your table classes `initialize()` method call the `searchManager()`
method, it will return a search manager instance. You can now add filters to the
manager by chaining them. The first arg of the `add()` method is the field, the
second the filter using the dot notation of cake to load filters from plugins.
The third one is an array of filter specific options. Please refer to
[the Options section](#options) for an explanation of the available options
supported by the different filters.

```php
use Search\Manager;

class ExampleTable extends Table {

    public function initialize(array $config)
    {
        parent::initialize();

        // Add the behaviour to your table
        $this->addBehavior('Search.Search');

        // Setup search filter using search manager
        $this->searchManager()
            ->value('author_id')
            // Here we will alias the 'q' query param to search the `Articles.title`
            // field and the `Articles.content` field, using a LIKE match, with `%`
            // both before and after.
            ->add('q', 'Search.Like', [
                'before' => true,
                'after' => true,
                'mode' => 'or',
                'comparison' => 'LIKE',
                'wildcardAny' => '*',
                'wildcardOne' => '?',
                'field' => ['title', 'content']
            ])
            ->add('foo', 'Search.Callback', [
                'callback' => function ($query, $args, $filter) {
                    // Modify $query as required
                }
            ]);
    }
```

You can use `SearchManager::add()` method to add filter or use specific methods
like `value()`, `like()` etc. for in built filters.

If you do not want to clutter your `initialize()` method with search config you
can instead add a `searchConfiguration()` method to the table class. The behavior
will look if such a method exists and if present use it to get the search manager
instance from it. This method **must** return a search manager instance.

If you want to change the name of the method, or have multiple methods and
switch between them, you can configure the name of the method by setting the
behaviors option `searchConfigMethod` to the name of the method you want.

```php
use Search\Manager;

class ExampleTable extends Table {

    public function searchConfiguration()
    {
        $search = new Manager($this);

        $search->like('title');

        return $search;
    }
}
```

### Controller class
In order for the Search plugin to work it will need to process the query params
which are passed in your URL. So you will need to edit your `index` method to
accommodate this.

```php
public function index()
{
    $query = $this->Articles
        // Use the plugins 'search' custom finder and pass in the
        // processed query params
        ->find('search', ['search' => $this->request->query])
        // You can add extra things to the query if you need to
        ->contain(['Comments'])
        ->where(['title IS NOT' => null]);

    $this->set('articles', $this->paginate($query));
}
```

The `search` finder is dynamically provided by the `Search` behavior.

If you are using the [crud](https://github.com/FriendsOfCake/crud) plugin you
just need to enable the [search](http://crud.readthedocs.io/en/latest/listeners/search.html)
listener for your crud action.

### Component
Then add the Search Prg component to the necessary methods in your controller.

```php
public function initialize()
{
    parent::initialize();
    $this->loadComponent('Search.Prg', [
        // This is default config. You can modify "actions" as needed to make
        // the PRG component work only for specified methods.
        'actions' => ['index', 'lookup']
    ]);
}
```

The `Search.Prg` component will allow your filtering forms to be populated using
the data in the query params. It uses the [Post, redirect, get pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Post/Redirect/Get).

## Filtering your data
Once you have completed all the setup you can now filter your data by passing
query params in your index method. Using the `Article` example given above, you
could filter your articles using the following.

`example.com/articles?q=cakephp`

Would filter your list of articles to any article with "cakephp" in the `title`
or `content` field. You might choose to make a `get` form which posts the filter
directly to the URL, but if you're using the `Search.Prg` component, you'll want
to use `POST`.

### Creating your form
In most cases you'll want to add a form to your index view which will search
your data.

```php
    echo $this->Form->create();
    // You'll need to populate $authors in the template from your controller
    echo $this->Form->input('author_id');
    // Match the search param in your table configuration
    echo $this->Form->input('q');
    echo $this->Form->button('Filter', ['type' => 'submit']);
    echo $this->Html->link('Reset', ['action' => 'index']);
    echo $this->Form->end();
```

If you are using the `Search.Prg` component the forms current values will be
populated from the query params.

#### Adding a reset button dynamically
If you pass down the information on whether the query was modified by your search query strings, you can also include a reset button only if necessary:
```php
// in your controller action
$this->set('isSearch', $this->Articles->isSearch());
```

Then one can switch based on that in the template:
```php
// in your form
if ($isSearch) {
	echo $this->Html->link('Reset', ['action' => 'index']);
}
```

## Filters

The Search plugin comes with a set of predefined search filters that allow you to
easily create the search results you need. Use:

- ``Value`` to limit results to exact matches
- ``Like`` to produce results containing the search query (``LIKE`` or ``ILIKE``)
- ``Boolean`` to limit results by truthy (by default: 1, true, '1', 'true', 'yes', 'on') and falsy (by default: 0, false, '0', 'false', 'no', 'off') values which are passed down to the ORM as true/1 or false/0 or ignored when being neither truthy or falsy.
- ``Finder`` to produce results using a [(custom)](http://book.cakephp.org/3.0/en/orm/retrieving-data-and-resultsets.html#custom-find-methods) finder
- ``Compare`` to produce results requiring operator comparison (
    ``>``, ``<``, ``>=`` and ``<=``)
- ``Callback`` to produce results using your own custom callable function

### Options

#### All filters

The following options are supported by all filters.

- `field` (`string`, defaults to the name passed to the first argument of the
  add filter method) The name of the field to use for searching. Use this option
  if you need to use a name in your forms that doesn't match the actual field name.

- `name` (`string`, defaults to the name passed to the first argument of the add
  filter method) The name of the field to look up in the request data. Use this
  option if you need to configure the name of the filter differently than the name
  of the field, in cases where you can't use the `field` option, for example when it
  is being used to define multiple fields, which is supported by the `Like` filter.

- `alwaysRun` (`bool`, defaults to `false`) Defines whether the filter should always
  run, irrespectively of whether the corresponding field exists in the request data.

- `filterEmpty` (`bool`, defaults to `false`) Defines whether the filter should not
  run in case the corresponding field in the request is empty. Refer to
  [the Optional fields section](#optional-fields) for additional details.

The following options are supported by all filters except `Callback` and `Finder`.

- `aliasField` (`bool`, defaults to `true`) Defines whether the field name should
  be aliased with respect to the alias used by the table class to which the behavior
  is attached to.

- `defaultValue` (`mixed`, defaults to `null`) The default value that is being
  used in case the value passed for the corresponding field is invalid or missing.

#### `Compare`

- `operator` (`string`, defaults to `>=`) The operator to use for comparison. Valid
  values are `>=`, `<=`, `>` and `<`.

#### `Like`

- `multiValue` (`bool`, defaults to `false`) Defines whether the filter accepts
  multiple values. If disabled, and multiple values are being passed, the filter
  will fall back to using the default value defined by the `defaultValue` option.

- `field` (`string|array`, defaults to ) The name of the field to use for
  searching. Works like the base `field` option but also accepts multiple field
  names as an array. When defining multiple fields, the search term is going to
  be looked up in all the given fields, using the conditional operator defined by
  the `fieldMode` option. 

- `before` (`bool`, defaults to `false`) Whether to automatically add a wildcard
  *before* the search term.

- `after` (`bool`, defaults to `false`) Whether to automatically add a wildcard
  *after* the search term.

- `mode` (`string`, default to `or`) **This options is deprecated**, please use
  `fieldMode` instead.

- `fieldMode` (`string`, defaults to `or`) The conditional mode to use when
  matching against multiple fields.

- `valueMode` (`string`, defaults to `or`) The conditional mode to use when
  searching for multiple values.

- `comparison` (`string`, defaults to `LIKE`) The comparison operator to use.

- `wildcardAny` (`string`, defaults to `*`) Defines the string that should be
  treated as a _any_ wildcard in case it is being encountered in the search term.
  The behavior will internally replace this with the appropriate `LIKE`
  compatible wildcard. This is useful if you want to pass wildcards inside of the
  search term, while still being able to use the actual wildcard character inside
  of the search term so that it is being treated as a part of the term. For example
  a search term of `* has reached 100%` would be converted to `% has reached 100\%`.

- `wildcardOne` (`string`, defaults to `?`) Defines the string that should be
  treated as a _one_ wildcard in case it is being encountered in the search term.
  Behaves similar to `wildcardAny`, that is, the actual `LIKE` compatible wildcard
  (`_`) is being escaped in case used the search term.

#### `Value`

- `multiValue` (`bool`, defaults to `false`) Defines whether the filter accepts
  multiple values. If disabled, and multiple values are being passed, the filter
  will fall back to using the default value defined by the `defaultValue` option.

- `mode` (`string`, possible values are `or` and `and`, defaults to `or`) The
  conditional mode to use when searching for multiple values.


## Optional fields

Sometimes you might want to search your data based on two of three inputs in
your form. You can use the `filterEmpty` search option to ignore any empty fields.

```php
// ExampleTable::initialize()
    $searchManager->value('author_id', [
        'filterEmpty' => true
    ]);
```

Be sure to allow empty in your search form, if you're using one.
```php
echo $this->Form->input('author_id', ['empty' => 'Pick an author']);
```

## Persisting the Query String

Persisting the query string can be done with the `queryStringWhitelist` option.
The CakePHP's Paginator params `sort` and `direction` when filtering are kept by default. 
Simply add all query strings that should be whitelisted.

Commit message:

Add missing stuff to filter options docs.

README.md, after:

# CakePHP Search

[![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/travis/FriendsOfCake/search/master.svg?style=flat-square)](https://travis-ci.org/FriendsOfCake/search)
[![Coverage Status](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/FriendsOfCake/search.svg?style=flat-square)](https://codecov.io/github/FriendsOfCake/search)
[![Total Downloads](https://img.shields.io/packagist/dt/friendsofcake/search.svg?style=flat-square)](https://packagist.org/packages/friendsofcake/search)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](https://packagist.org/packages/friendsofcake/search)

Search provides a simple interface to create paginate-able filters for your CakePHP 3.x application.

## Requirements

* CakePHP 3.0.0 or greater.

## Installation

* Install the plugin with composer from your CakePHP Project's ROOT directory
(where composer.json file is located)

```sh
php composer.phar require friendsofcake/search
```

* Load the plugin by running command

```sh
./bin/cake plugin load Search
```

or adding following to your `config/bootstrap.php`

```php
Plugin::load('Search');
```

## Usage

The plugin has three main parts which you will need to configure and include in
your application.

### Table class

There are three tasks during setup in your table class. Firstly you must add a
`use` statement for the `Search\Manager`. Next you need to attach the `Search`
behaviour to your table class. Then you have two options to work with the search
filters:

The first way is the prefered way as it works the same as many core classes as
well. In your table classes `initialize()` method call the `searchManager()`
method, it will return a search manager instance. You can now add filters to the
manager by chaining them. The first arg of the `add()` method is the field, the
second the filter using the dot notation of cake to load filters from plugins.
The third one is an array of filter specific options. Please refer to
[the Options section](#options) for an explanation of the available options
supported by the different filters.

```php
use Search\Manager;

class ExampleTable extends Table {

    public function initialize(array $config)
    {
        parent::initialize();

        // Add the behaviour to your table
        $this->addBehavior('Search.Search');

        // Setup search filter using search manager
        $this->searchManager()
            ->value('author_id')
            // Here we will alias the 'q' query param to search the `Articles.title`
            // field and the `Articles.content` field, using a LIKE match, with `%`
            // both before and after.
            ->add('q', 'Search.Like', [
                'before' => true,
                'after' => true,
                'mode' => 'or',
                'comparison' => 'LIKE',
                'wildcardAny' => '*',
                'wildcardOne' => '?',
                'field' => ['title', 'content']
            ])
            ->add('foo', 'Search.Callback', [
                'callback' => function ($query, $args, $filter) {
                    // Modify $query as required
                }
            ]);
    }
```

You can use `SearchManager::add()` method to add filter or use specific methods
like `value()`, `like()` etc. for in built filters.

If you do not want to clutter your `initialize()` method with search config you
can instead add a `searchConfiguration()` method to the table class. The behavior
will look if such a method exists and if present use it to get the search manager
instance from it. This method **must** return a search manager instance.

If you want to change the name of the method, or have multiple methods and
switch between them, you can configure the name of the method by setting the
behaviors option `searchConfigMethod` to the name of the method you want.

```php
use Search\Manager;

class ExampleTable extends Table {

    public function searchConfiguration()
    {
        $search = new Manager($this);

        $search->like('title');

        return $search;
    }
}
```

### Controller class
In order for the Search plugin to work it will need to process the query params
which are passed in your URL. So you will need to edit your `index` method to
accommodate this.

```php
public function index()
{
    $query = $this->Articles
        // Use the plugins 'search' custom finder and pass in the
        // processed query params
        ->find('search', ['search' => $this->request->query])
        // You can add extra things to the query if you need to
        ->contain(['Comments'])
        ->where(['title IS NOT' => null]);

    $this->set('articles', $this->paginate($query));
}
```

The `search` finder is dynamically provided by the `Search` behavior.

If you are using the [crud](https://github.com/FriendsOfCake/crud) plugin you
just need to enable the [search](http://crud.readthedocs.io/en/latest/listeners/search.html)
listener for your crud action.

### Component
Then add the Search Prg component to the necessary methods in your controller.

```php
public function initialize()
{
    parent::initialize();
    $this->loadComponent('Search.Prg', [
        // This is default config. You can modify "actions" as needed to make
        // the PRG component work only for specified methods.
        'actions' => ['index', 'lookup']
    ]);
}
```

The `Search.Prg` component will allow your filtering forms to be populated using
the data in the query params. It uses the [Post, redirect, get pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Post/Redirect/Get).

## Filtering your data
Once you have completed all the setup you can now filter your data by passing
query params in your index method. Using the `Article` example given above, you
could filter your articles using the following.

`example.com/articles?q=cakephp`

Would filter your list of articles to any article with "cakephp" in the `title`
or `content` field. You might choose to make a `get` form which posts the filter
directly to the URL, but if you're using the `Search.Prg` component, you'll want
to use `POST`.

### Creating your form
In most cases you'll want to add a form to your index view which will search
your data.

```php
    echo $this->Form->create();
    // You'll need to populate $authors in the template from your controller
    echo $this->Form->input('author_id');
    // Match the search param in your table configuration
    echo $this->Form->input('q');
    echo $this->Form->button('Filter', ['type' => 'submit']);
    echo $this->Html->link('Reset', ['action' => 'index']);
    echo $this->Form->end();
```

If you are using the `Search.Prg` component the forms current values will be
populated from the query params.

#### Adding a reset button dynamically
If you pass down the information on whether the query was modified by your search query strings, you can also include a reset button only if necessary:
```php
// in your controller action
$this->set('isSearch', $this->Articles->isSearch());
```

Then one can switch based on that in the template:
```php
// in your form
if ($isSearch) {
	echo $this->Html->link('Reset', ['action' => 'index']);
}
```

## Filters

The Search plugin comes with a set of predefined search filters that allow you to
easily create the search results you need. Use:

- ``Value`` to limit results to exact matches
- ``Like`` to produce results containing the search query (``LIKE`` or ``ILIKE``)
- ``Boolean`` to limit results by truthy (by default: 1, true, '1', 'true', 'yes', 'on') and falsy (by default: 0, false, '0', 'false', 'no', 'off') values which are passed down to the ORM as true/1 or false/0 or ignored when being neither truthy or falsy.
- ``Finder`` to produce results using a [(custom)](http://book.cakephp.org/3.0/en/orm/retrieving-data-and-resultsets.html#custom-find-methods) finder
- ``Compare`` to produce results requiring operator comparison (
    ``>``, ``<``, ``>=`` and ``<=``)
- ``Callback`` to produce results using your own custom callable function

### Options

#### All filters

The following options are supported by all filters.

- `field` (`string`, defaults to the name passed to the first argument of the
  add filter method) The name of the field to use for searching. Use this option
  if you need to use a name in your forms that doesn't match the actual field name.

- `name` (`string`, defaults to the name passed to the first argument of the add
  filter method) The name of the field to look up in the request data. Use this
  option if you need to configure the name of the filter differently than the name
  of the field, in cases where you can't use the `field` option, for example when it
  is being used to define multiple fields, which is supported by the `Like` filter.

- `alwaysRun` (`bool`, defaults to `false`) Defines whether the filter should always
  run, irrespectively of whether the corresponding field exists in the request data.

- `filterEmpty` (`bool`, defaults to `false`) Defines whether the filter should not
  run in case the corresponding field in the request is empty. Refer to
  [the Optional fields section](#optional-fields) for additional details.

The following options are supported by all filters except `Callback` and `Finder`.

- `aliasField` (`bool`, defaults to `true`) Defines whether the field name should
  be aliased with respect to the alias used by the table class to which the behavior
  is attached to.

- `defaultValue` (`mixed`, defaults to `null`) The default value that is being
  used in case the value passed for the corresponding field is invalid or missing.

#### `Compare`

- `operator` (`string`, defaults to `>=`) The operator to use for comparison. Valid
  values are `>=`, `<=`, `>` and `<`.

#### `Like`

- `multiValue` (`bool`, defaults to `false`) Defines whether the filter accepts
  multiple values. If disabled, and multiple values are being passed, the filter
  will fall back to using the default value defined by the `defaultValue` option.

- `field` (`string|array`, defaults to the name passed to the first argument of the
  add filter method) The name of the field to use for searching. Works like the base
  `field` option but also accepts multiple field names as an array. When defining
  multiple fields, the search term is going to be looked up in all the given fields,
  using the conditional operator defined by the `fieldMode` option.

- `before` (`bool`, defaults to `false`) Whether to automatically add a wildcard
  *before* the search term.

- `after` (`bool`, defaults to `false`) Whether to automatically add a wildcard
  *after* the search term.

- ~~`mode`~~ (`string`, default to `or`) **This options is deprecated**, please use
  `fieldMode` instead.

- `fieldMode` (`string`, defaults to `or`) The conditional mode to use when
  matching against multiple fields. Valid values are `or` and `and`.

- `valueMode` (`string`, defaults to `or`) The conditional mode to use when
  searching for multiple values. Valid values are `or` and `and`.

- `comparison` (`string`, defaults to `LIKE`) The comparison operator to use.

- `wildcardAny` (`string`, defaults to `*`) Defines the string that should be
  treated as a _any_ wildcard in case it is being encountered in the search term.
  The behavior will internally replace this with the appropriate `LIKE`
  compatible wildcard. This is useful if you want to pass wildcards inside of the
  search term, while still being able to use the actual wildcard character inside
  of the search term so that it is being treated as a part of the term. For example
  a search term of `* has reached 100%` would be converted to `% has reached 100\%`.

- `wildcardOne` (`string`, defaults to `?`) Defines the string that should be
  treated as a _one_ wildcard in case it is being encountered in the search term.
  Behaves similar to `wildcardAny`, that is, the actual `LIKE` compatible wildcard
  (`_`) is being escaped in case used the search term.

#### `Value`

- `multiValue` (`bool`, defaults to `false`) Defines whether the filter accepts
  multiple values. If disabled, and multiple values are being passed, the filter
  will fall back to using the default value defined by the `defaultValue` option.

- `mode` (`string`, defaults to `or`) The conditional mode to use when searching for
  multiple values. Valid values are `or` and `and`.


## Optional fields

Sometimes you might want to search your data based on two of three inputs in
your form. You can use the `filterEmpty` search option to ignore any empty fields.

```php
// ExampleTable::initialize()
    $searchManager->value('author_id', [
        'filterEmpty' => true
    ]);
```

Be sure to allow empty in your search form, if you're using one.
```php
echo $this->Form->input('author_id', ['empty' => 'Pick an author']);
```

## Persisting the Query String

Persisting the query string can be done with the `queryStringWhitelist` option.
The CakePHP's Paginator params `sort` and `direction` when filtering are kept by default. 
Simply add all query strings that should be whitelisted.
